---
ID: 34905
post_title: We vs They
author: Zach Ware
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://zgware.com/2016/02/26/we-vs-you/
published: true
post_date: 2016-02-26 06:05:38
---
Consultants have a habit of&nbsp;saying "we" when talking about company strategy. They co-opt themselves onto your team and make suggests like "we should target that market" or "our revenues are looking good."

The word choice is part of a deliberate strategy to create&nbsp;a warm, fuzzy feeling in an otherwise transactional relationship.

I have the opposite view. It's creepy.&nbsp;I notice it every time a consultant does it and it makes me feel weird.

Recently I've observed some&nbsp;investors doing it when describing big company successes for companies they are involved in, often in blog posts. <strong>We</strong> raised a&nbsp;big round. <strong>We</strong> launched a&nbsp;killer feature.

100% of my focus as an investor is on helping our portfolio companies succeed. Sometimes I help raise a round. Sometimes I help solve problems. Sometimes I work on product design.

But when most great&nbsp;deeds are&nbsp;done, the&nbsp;great work was the output of the&nbsp;great team.&nbsp;<strong>They</strong> did it. I'm proud of&nbsp;<strong>them</strong>.

Sometimes I say we when&nbsp;<strong>we</strong> actually did the work. There are times when&nbsp;I get to be a part of a problem-solving team. And in those cases and with those specific accomplishments, I've earned the right to say we.&nbsp;Maybe the investors I'm thinking of did as well.

Most of the time, even if I'm a company director, I'm a bit player.&nbsp;<strong>I</strong> didn't&nbsp;make magic happen. I helped.&nbsp;<strong>They</strong> should be congratulated.